It was the longest night of winter. At the bottom of the sea an old fish gathered together 12,000 of her children and grandchildren and began to tell them this story:

Once upon a time a little black fish lived with her mother in a small pond on the side of a mountain. Their home was behind a black, moss-covered rock, under which they both slept at night. The little fish longed to see the moonlight in their home just once. From morning till evening, the mother and child swam after each other. Sometimes they joined other fish and rapidly darted in and out of small crevices. The little fish was an only child, for of the 10,000 eggs which the mother had laid, only she had survived.

For several days the little fish had been deep in thought and had talked very little. She swam slowly behind her mother around the pond and did not play with the other fish. Her mother thought her child was sick and would soon be well. In fact, the black fish's sickness was really something else!

Early one morning before the sun had risen, the little fish woke her mother and said

"Mother, I want to talk to you."

Half-asleep, the mother responded

"Child, this isn't the time to talk. Save your words for later. Go swimming?"

"No, Mother! I can't go swimming anymore. I must leave here."

"Do you really have to leave?"

"Yes, Mother, I must go."

"Just a minute! Where do you want to go at this hour of the morning?"

"I want to go see where the stream ends. You know, Mother, I've been wondering where the end of the stream is ... I haven't been able to think about anything else. I didn't sleep a wink all night. At last, I decided to go and find where the stream ends. I want to know what's happening in other places."

he mother laughed - "When I was a child, I used to think a lot like that. But, my dear, a stream has no beginning and no end. That's the way it is. The stream just flows and never goes anywhere."

"But mother dear, isn't it true that everything comes to an end ? Nights end, days end, weeks, months, years ..."

"Forget this pretentious talk," interrupted the mother - "Let's go swimming. Now is the time to swim, not talk."

"No, Mother, I'm tired of this swimming, I want to set out and see what's happening elsewhere. Maybe you think someone taught me these ideas but believe me, I've had these thoughts for a long time. Of course, I've learned many things here and there. For instance, I know that when most fish get old, they complain about everything. I want to know if life is simply for circling around in a small place until you become old and nothing else, or is there another way to live in the world ?"

When the little fish finished the mother exclaimed - "My dear child, are you crazy? World! ... World! What is this other world! The world is right here where we are. Life is just as we have it..."

Just then, a large fish approached their home and said: "Neighbor, what are you arguing about with your child? Aren't you planning to go swimming today?"
Hearing her neighbor's voice, the mother came out of the house and said, "What's the world coming to! Now children even want to teach their mothers something!"
How so? "asked the neighbor."
Listen to the places this half-pint wants to go!" replied the mother. "Saying over and over again I want to go see what's happening in the world. What pretentious talk!"

"Little one," said the neighbor, "let's see. Since when have you become a scholar and philosopher and not told us?"
"Madam," answered the little fish, "I don't know what you mean by 'scholar' and 'philosopher,' I've just gotten tired of these swims. I don't want to continue this boring stuff and be happy as a fool until one day I wake up and see that like all of you, I've become old, but still am as dumb as I am now."
"Oh, what talk!" exclaimed the neighbor.
"I never thought my only child would turn out this way," said the mother. "I don't know what evil person put my sweet baby up to this."

"No one put me up to anything," said the little fish. "I have reason, and intelligence and understanding. I have eyes and I can see."
"Sister," said the neighbor to the little fish's mother, "do you remember that twisted-up snail?"
"Yes, you're right," said the mother. "He used to push himself on my baby. God knows what I would do to him!"
"That's enough, Mother," said the little fish. "He was my friend."
"Friendship between a fish and a snail," said the mother, "I've never heard of such a thing!"
"And I've never heard of a fish and a snail being enemies," replied the little fish. "But you all drowned the poor fellow."
